README.md, before:

# Commodore Component: openshift4-terraform

This is a [Commodore][commodore] Component for openshift4-terraform.

This repository is part of Project Syn.
For documentation on Project Syn and this component, see https://syn.tools.

## Documentation

Documentation for this component is written using [Asciidoc][asciidoc] and [Antora][antora].
It is located in the [docs/](docs) folder.
The [Divio documentation structure](https://documentation.divio.com/) is used to organize its content.

Run the `make docs-serve` command in the root of the project, and then browse to http://localhost:2020 to see a preview of the current state of the documentation.

After writing the documentation, please use the `make docs-vale` command and correct any warnings raised by the tool.

## Contributing and license

This library is licensed under [BSD-3-Clause](LICENSE).
For information about how to contribute see [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md).

[commodore]: https://docs.syn.tools/commodore/index.html
[asciidoc]: https://asciidoctor.org/
[antora]: https://antora.org/

Commit message:

Update component to latest template

README.md, after:

# Commodore Component: openshift4-terraform

This is a [Commodore][commodore] Component for openshift4-terraform.

This repository is part of Project Syn.
For documentation on Project Syn and this component, see https://syn.tools.

## Documentation

The rendered documentation for this component is available on the [Commodore Components Hub](https://hub.syn.tools/openshift4-terraform).

Documentation for this component is written using [Asciidoc][asciidoc] and [Antora][antora].
It is located in the [docs/](docs) folder.
The [Divio documentation structure](https://documentation.divio.com/) is used to organize its content.

Run the `make docs-serve` command in the root of the project, and then browse to http://localhost:2020 to see a preview of the current state of the documentation.

After writing the documentation, please use the `make docs-vale` command and correct any warnings raised by the tool.

## Contributing and license

This library is licensed under [BSD-3-Clause](LICENSE).
For information about how to contribute see [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md).

[commodore]: https://syn.tools/commodore/
[asciidoc]: https://asciidoctor.org/
[antora]: https://antora.org/
