docs/modules/ROOT/pages/references/parameters.adoc, before:

= Parameters

The parent key for all of the following parameters is `openshift4_terraform`.

== `provider`

[horizontal]
type:: enum
required:: Yes
values:: `cloudscale`, `exoscale`
default:: `${facts:cloud}`

This variable is used to select the Terraform module and a suitable default configuration for the specified cloud provider.
The supported providers are:

- https://cloudscale.ch[Cloudscale.ch] -- https://github.com/appuio/terraform-openshift4-cloudscale[Terraform module]
- https://exoscale.com[Exoscale] -- https://github.com/appuio/terraform-openshift4-exoscale[Terraform module]

== `gitlab_ci.tags`

[horizontal]
type:: array
default:: `[]`

The GitLab CI Runner tags to apply to the GitLab jobs.

== `gitlab_ci.git`

[horizontal]
type:: dict
default:: `{}`

Git user information for the CI pipeline.
If not overridden, the default GitLab CI user information is used for commits made by the CI pipeline.

Valid keys for the dict are `username` and `email`.
If present, these keys are configured as `GIT_AUTHOR_NAME` and `GIT_AUTHOR_EMAIL` for the CI pipeline respectively.

== `images.terraform.image`

[horizontal]
type:: string
default:: See https://github.com/appuio/component-openshift4-terraform/blob/master/class/defaults.yml[`class/defaults.yml`]

This is the image repository that's used in the generated GitLab CI configuration for automated pipelines.

== `images.terraform.tag`

[horizontal]
type:: string
default:: See https://github.com/appuio/component-openshift4-terraform/blob/master/class/defaults.yml[`class/defaults.yml`]

This is the corresponding image tag for `images.terraform.image`

== `terraform_variables`

[horizontal]
type:: object
default:: see `class/defaults.yml`

Terraform input variables for the selected Terraform module (see parameter `provider`).
They're passed to the module without any further processing.
The variables are merged with the defaults, unless overridden.

== `version`

[horizontal]
type:: string
default:: See https://github.com/appuio/component-openshift4-terraform/blob/master/class/defaults.yml[`class/defaults.yml`, key `_tf_module_version`]

The git revision of the selected Terraform module.
See the documentation for <<_provider,parameter `provider`>> for supported providers.
By default, parameter `provider` is used to look up the version for the Terraform module in internal parameter `_tf_module_version`.

== Example

See examples in the how-to pages:

* xref:how-tos/use-cloudscale.adoc[cloudscale.ch example]
* xref:how-tos/use-exoscale.adoc[Exoscale example]

Commit message:

Allow outputting additional TF outputs

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/references/parameters.adoc, after:

= Parameters

The parent key for all of the following parameters is `openshift4_terraform`.

== `provider`

[horizontal]
type:: enum
required:: Yes
values:: `cloudscale`, `exoscale`
default:: `${facts:cloud}`

This variable is used to select the Terraform module and a suitable default configuration for the specified cloud provider.
The supported providers are:

- https://cloudscale.ch[Cloudscale.ch] -- https://github.com/appuio/terraform-openshift4-cloudscale[Terraform module]
- https://exoscale.com[Exoscale] -- https://github.com/appuio/terraform-openshift4-exoscale[Terraform module]

== `gitlab_ci.tags`

[horizontal]
type:: array
default:: `[]`

The GitLab CI Runner tags to apply to the GitLab jobs.

== `gitlab_ci.git`

[horizontal]
type:: dict
default:: `{}`

Git user information for the CI pipeline.
If not overridden, the default GitLab CI user information is used for commits made by the CI pipeline.

Valid keys for the dict are `username` and `email`.
If present, these keys are configured as `GIT_AUTHOR_NAME` and `GIT_AUTHOR_EMAIL` for the CI pipeline respectively.

== `images.terraform.image`

[horizontal]
type:: string
default:: See https://github.com/appuio/component-openshift4-terraform/blob/master/class/defaults.yml[`class/defaults.yml`]

This is the image repository that's used in the generated GitLab CI configuration for automated pipelines.

== `images.terraform.tag`

[horizontal]
type:: string
default:: See https://github.com/appuio/component-openshift4-terraform/blob/master/class/defaults.yml[`class/defaults.yml`]

This is the corresponding image tag for `images.terraform.image`

== `terraform_variables`

[horizontal]
type:: object
default:: see `class/defaults.yml`

Terraform input variables for the selected Terraform module (see parameter `provider`).
They're passed to the module without any further processing.
The variables are merged with the defaults, unless overridden.


== `additional_outputs`

[horizontal]
type:: object
default:: `{}`
example::
+
[source,yaml]
----
additional_outputs:
  my_output: '\${module.cluster.my_output}'
----

Additional outputs that are passed to the Terraform module.
The outputs are merged with the defaults, defaults can't be overridden.
The keys are then name of the output, the value should contain a reference to a output variable from the Terraform module.
Additional escaping might be needed since Terraform variables use the same syntax as reclass; see the example above.


== `version`

[horizontal]
type:: string
default:: See https://github.com/appuio/component-openshift4-terraform/blob/master/class/defaults.yml[`class/defaults.yml`, key `_tf_module_version`]

The git revision of the selected Terraform module.
See the documentation for <<_provider,parameter `provider`>> for supported providers.
By default, parameter `provider` is used to look up the version for the Terraform module in internal parameter `_tf_module_version`.

== Example

See examples in the how-to pages:

* xref:how-tos/use-cloudscale.adoc[cloudscale.ch example]
* xref:how-tos/use-exoscale.adoc[Exoscale example]
