docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/migrate-cloudscale-router.adoc, before:

= Migrate the router floating IP from Puppet LBs to cloudscale LBaaS

Migrating the router floating IP from the Puppet LBs to a cloudscale LBaaS instance requires some manual steps.

== Prerequisites

* You need to be able to execute the following CLI tools locally:
** `commodore`
** `kapitan`
** `docker`
** `yq` https://github.com/mikefarah/yq[yq YAML processor] (Version 4 or newer)
** `jq`
** `vault` https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/commands[Vault CLI]

* Admin access to the cluster you want to migrate
* Admin access to the cluster's Puppet-managed LBs
* The cluster is already updated to use component version v9.4.0 or newer

[TIP]
====
We recommend installing Commodore with `uv`.
See the https://syn.tools/commodore/how-to/installing-commodore.html[Commodore installation how-to] for details.

Using `uv` to install Commodore will ensure that `commodore` and `kapitan` are available in your `$PATH`.
====

== Setup environment

. Access to API
+
[source,bash]
----
# For example: https://api.syn.vshn.net
# IMPORTANT: do NOT add a trailing `/`. Commands below will fail.
export COMMODORE_API_URL=<lieutenant-api-endpoint>
export COMMODORE_API_TOKEN=<lieutenant-api-token>

export CLUSTER_ID=<lieutenant-cluster-id> # Looks like: c-<something>
export TENANT_ID=$(curl -sH "Authorization: Bearer ${COMMODORE_API_TOKEN}" ${COMMODORE_API_URL}/clusters/${CLUSTER_ID} | jq -r .tenant)

# From https://git.vshn.net/-/profile/personal_access_tokens, "api" scope is sufficient
export GITLAB_TOKEN=<gitlab-api-token>
export GITLAB_USER=<gitlab-user-name>
----

. Connect with Vault
+
[source,bash]
----
export VAULT_ADDR=https://vault-prod.syn.vshn.net
vault login -method=ldap username=<your.name>
----

. Fetch the hieradata repo token from Vault
+
[source,bash]
----
export HIERADATA_REPO_SECRET=$(vault kv get \
  -format=json "clusters/kv/lbaas/hieradata_repo_token" | jq '.data.data')
export HIERADATA_REPO_USER=$(echo "${HIERADATA_REPO_SECRET}" | jq -r '.user')
export HIERADATA_REPO_TOKEN=$(echo "${HIERADATA_REPO_SECRET}" | jq -r '.token')
----

. Fetch the cluster cloudscale API token from Vault
+
[source,bash]
----
cloudscale_token=$(vault kv get \
  -format=json "clusters/kv/${TENANT_ID}/${CLUSTER_ID}/cloudscale")
export CLOUDSCALE_API_TOKEN=$(echo $cloudscale_token | jq -r '.data.data.token')
----

. Set the floaty API key Terraform variable from Vault
+
[source,bash]
----
floaty_key=$(vault kv get \
  -format=json "clusters/kv/${TENANT_ID}/${CLUSTER_ID}/floaty")
export TF_VAR_lb_cloudscale_api_secret=$(echo $floaty_key | jq -r '.data.data.iam_secret')
----

. Compile the cluster catalog to create a local working directory
+
[source,bash]
----
commodore catalog compile "${CLUSTER_ID}"
----

== Deploy cloudscale LBaaS instance and move floating IP

. Disable ArgoCD auto sync
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl --as=cluster-admin -n syn patch apps root --type=json \
  -p '[{"op":"replace", "path":"/spec/syncPolicy", "value": {}}]'
----

. Deploy the cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller and update the Terraform config
+
[source,bash]
----
pushd inventory/classes/${TENANT_ID}

yq eval -i '.applications += ["cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller"]' ${CLUSTER_ID}.yml
yq eval -i ".parameters.openshift4_terraform.terraform_variables.allocate_router_vip_for_lb_controller = true" \
  ${CLUSTER_ID}.yml

git commit -a -m "Prepare ingress migration to cloudscale LBaaS for ${CLUSTER_ID}"
git push

popd
----

. Compile catalog again
+
[source,bash]
----
commodore catalog compile ${CLUSTER_ID}
----

. Deploy cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl --as=cluster-admin apply -f catalog/manifests/cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller/00_namespace.yaml
kapitan refs --reveal --refs-path catalog/refs -f catalog/manifests/cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller/10_secrets.yaml | \
  kubectl --as=cluster-admin apply -f -
kubectl --as=cluster-admin apply -Rf catalog/manifests/cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller/10_kustomize
kubectl -n appuio-cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller \
  wait --for condition=available \
  deploy cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller-controller-manager
----

. Deploy ingress loadbalancer
+
[source,bash]
----
yq 'del(.spec.floatingIPAddresses)' catalog/manifests/cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller/20_loadbalancers.yaml | \
  kubectl --as=cluster-admin apply -f -
----

. Wait for the cluster ingress to become reachable via the loadbalancer
+
[source,bash]
----
export LB_IP=""
while [ "$LB_IP" == "" ]; do
  export LB_IP=$(kubectl --as=cluster-admin -n appuio-cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller \
    get loadbalancer ingress -oyaml | \
    yq '(.status.virtualIPAddresses[]|select(.address|contains("2a06")|not)|.address)//""')
  if [ "$LB_IP" == "" ]; then
    echo -n "."
    sleep 5
  fi
done && echo -e "\nLoadbalancer available at ${LB_IP}"

export APPS_DOMAIN=$(kapitan inventory -t cluster --inventory-backend=reclass-rs | \
  yq .parameters.openshift.appsDomain)
curl --resolve console-openshift-console.${APPS_DOMAIN}:80:${LB_IP} \
  http://console-openshift-console.${APPS_DOMAIN} -vI <1>
----
<1> This command should return `HTTP/1.1 302 Found`

== Update Terraform state

. Configure Terraform environment
+
[source,bash]
----
cat <<EOF > ./terraform.env
CLOUDSCALE_API_TOKEN
TF_VAR_ignition_bootstrap
TF_VAR_lb_cloudscale_api_secret
TF_VAR_control_vshn_net_token
GIT_AUTHOR_NAME
GIT_AUTHOR_EMAIL
HIERADATA_REPO_TOKEN
EOF
----

. Setup Terraform
+
[source,bash]
----
# Set terraform image and tag to be used
tf_image=$(\
  yq eval ".parameters.openshift4_terraform.images.terraform.image" \
  dependencies/openshift4-terraform/class/defaults.yml)
tf_tag=$(\
  yq eval ".parameters.openshift4_terraform.images.terraform.tag" \
  dependencies/openshift4-terraform/class/defaults.yml)

# Generate the terraform alias
base_dir=$(pwd)
alias terraform='touch .terraformrc; docker run -it --rm \
  -e REAL_UID=$(id -u) \
  -e TF_CLI_CONFIG_FILE=/tf/.terraformrc \
  --env-file ${base_dir}/terraform.env \
  -w /tf \
  -v $(pwd):/tf \
  --ulimit memlock=-1 \
  "${tf_image}:${tf_tag}" /tf/terraform.sh'

export GITLAB_REPOSITORY_URL=$(curl -sH "Authorization: Bearer $(commodore fetch-token)" ${COMMODORE_API_URL}/clusters/${CLUSTER_ID} | jq -r '.gitRepo.url' | sed 's|ssh://||; s|/|:|')
export GITLAB_REPOSITORY_NAME=${GITLAB_REPOSITORY_URL##*/}
export GITLAB_CATALOG_PROJECT_ID=$(curl -sH "Authorization: Bearer ${GITLAB_TOKEN}" "https://git.vshn.net/api/v4/projects?simple=true&search=${GITLAB_REPOSITORY_NAME/.git}" | jq -r ".[] | select(.ssh_url_to_repo == \"${GITLAB_REPOSITORY_URL}\") | .id")
export GITLAB_STATE_URL="https://git.vshn.net/api/v4/projects/${GITLAB_CATALOG_PROJECT_ID}/terraform/state/cluster"

pushd catalog/manifests/openshift4-terraform/
----

. Initialize Terraform
+
[source,bash]
----
terraform init \
  "-backend-config=address=${GITLAB_STATE_URL}" \
  "-backend-config=lock_address=${GITLAB_STATE_URL}/lock" \
  "-backend-config=unlock_address=${GITLAB_STATE_URL}/lock" \
  "-backend-config=username=${GITLAB_USER}" \
  "-backend-config=password=${GITLAB_TOKEN}" \
  "-backend-config=lock_method=POST" \
  "-backend-config=unlock_method=DELETE" \
  "-backend-config=retry_wait_min=5"
----

. Move floating IP Terraform state
+
[source,bash]
----
terraform state mv "module.cluster.module.lb.cloudscale_floating_ip.router_vip[0]" \
  "module.cluster.cloudscale_floating_ip.router_vip[0]"
----

. Get router floating IP from Terraform state
+
[source,bash]
----
terraform refresh
export INGRESS_FLOATING_IP=$(terraform output -raw router_vip)
----

. Grab LB hostnames from Terraform state
+
[source,bash]
----
declare -a LB_FQDNS
for id in 1 2; do
  LB_FQDNS[$id]=$(terraform state show "module.cluster.module.lb.cloudscale_server.lb[$(expr $id - 1)]" | grep fqdn | awk '{print $2}' | tr -d ' "\r\n')
done
----

. Disable Puppet on LBs
+
[source,bash]
----
for lb in "${LB_FQDNS[@]}"; do
  ssh $lb sudo puppetctl stop "Migrating router floating IP"
done
----

. Remove router floating IP from Floaty and restart keepalived on LBs
+
[source,bash]
----
for lb in "${LB_FQDNS[@]}"; do
  ssh $lb sudo sed -i "/${INGRESS_FLOATING_IP}/d" /etc/floaty/global.yaml
  ssh $lb sudo systemctl restart keepalived
done
----

. Run Terraform
+
[source,bash]
----
terraform apply
----

. Merge Hieradata MR
+
NOTE: This won't have an immediate effect since we've disabled Puppet on the LBs.

. Switch back to Commodore working directory
+
[source,bash]
----
popd
----

== Move floating IP to LBaaS instance

. Set router floating IP in cluster config
+
[source,bash]
----
pushd inventory/classes/${TENANT_ID}

yq eval -i '.parameters.openshift.cloudscale.ingress_floating_ip_v4 = "'$INGRESS_FLOATING_IP'"' \
  ${CLUSTER_ID}.yml

git commit -a -m "Migrate ingress floating IP to cloudscale LBaaS for ${CLUSTER_ID}"
git push

popd
----

. Compile and push catalog
+
[source,bash]
----
commodore catalog compile ${CLUSTER_ID} --push -i
----

. Enable ArgoCD sync
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl --as=cluster-admin -n syn patch apps root --type=json \
  -p '[{
    "op":"replace",
    "path":"/spec/syncPolicy",
    "value": {"automated": {"prune": true, "selfHeal": true}}
  }]'
----

. Wait until cloudscale floating IP is attached to cloudscale LBaaS instance
+
[source,bash]
----
export AUTH_HEADER="Authorization: Bearer ${TF_VAR_lb_cloudscale_api_secret}"
while [ "$(curl -sH"$AUTH_HEADER" https://api.cloudscale.ch/v1/floating-ips/${INGRESS_FLOATING_IP} | jq -r '.load_balancer')" == "null" ]; do
  echo -n '.'
  sleep 1
done && echo -e "\nFloating IP attached to LBaaS instance"
----

. Verify that cluster console is accessible
+
[source,bash]
----
curl https://console-openshift-console.${APPS_DOMAIN} -vI
----

. Enable Puppet on LBs
+
[source,bash]
----
for lb in "${LB_FQDNS[@]}"; do
  ssh $lb sudo puppetctl start
done
----

. Verify that cluster console is still accessible
+
[source,bash]
----
curl https://console-openshift-console.${APPS_DOMAIN} -vI
----

Commit message:

Add a note that the hieradata MR must be reviewed carefully

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/migrate-cloudscale-router.adoc, after:

= Migrate the router floating IP from Puppet LBs to cloudscale LBaaS

Migrating the router floating IP from the Puppet LBs to a cloudscale LBaaS instance requires some manual steps.

== Prerequisites

* You need to be able to execute the following CLI tools locally:
** `commodore`
** `kapitan`
** `docker`
** `yq` https://github.com/mikefarah/yq[yq YAML processor] (Version 4 or newer)
** `jq`
** `vault` https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/commands[Vault CLI]

* Admin access to the cluster you want to migrate
* Admin access to the cluster's Puppet-managed LBs
* The cluster is already updated to use component version v9.4.0 or newer

[TIP]
====
We recommend installing Commodore with `uv`.
See the https://syn.tools/commodore/how-to/installing-commodore.html[Commodore installation how-to] for details.

Using `uv` to install Commodore will ensure that `commodore` and `kapitan` are available in your `$PATH`.
====

== Setup environment

. Access to API
+
[source,bash]
----
# For example: https://api.syn.vshn.net
# IMPORTANT: do NOT add a trailing `/`. Commands below will fail.
export COMMODORE_API_URL=<lieutenant-api-endpoint>
export COMMODORE_API_TOKEN=<lieutenant-api-token>

export CLUSTER_ID=<lieutenant-cluster-id> # Looks like: c-<something>
export TENANT_ID=$(curl -sH "Authorization: Bearer ${COMMODORE_API_TOKEN}" ${COMMODORE_API_URL}/clusters/${CLUSTER_ID} | jq -r .tenant)

# From https://git.vshn.net/-/profile/personal_access_tokens, "api" scope is sufficient
export GITLAB_TOKEN=<gitlab-api-token>
export GITLAB_USER=<gitlab-user-name>
----

. Connect with Vault
+
[source,bash]
----
export VAULT_ADDR=https://vault-prod.syn.vshn.net
vault login -method=ldap username=<your.name>
----

. Fetch the hieradata repo token from Vault
+
[source,bash]
----
export HIERADATA_REPO_SECRET=$(vault kv get \
  -format=json "clusters/kv/lbaas/hieradata_repo_token" | jq '.data.data')
export HIERADATA_REPO_USER=$(echo "${HIERADATA_REPO_SECRET}" | jq -r '.user')
export HIERADATA_REPO_TOKEN=$(echo "${HIERADATA_REPO_SECRET}" | jq -r '.token')
----

. Fetch the cluster cloudscale API token from Vault
+
[source,bash]
----
cloudscale_token=$(vault kv get \
  -format=json "clusters/kv/${TENANT_ID}/${CLUSTER_ID}/cloudscale")
export CLOUDSCALE_API_TOKEN=$(echo $cloudscale_token | jq -r '.data.data.token')
----

. Set the floaty API key Terraform variable from Vault
+
[source,bash]
----
floaty_key=$(vault kv get \
  -format=json "clusters/kv/${TENANT_ID}/${CLUSTER_ID}/floaty")
export TF_VAR_lb_cloudscale_api_secret=$(echo $floaty_key | jq -r '.data.data.iam_secret')
----

. Compile the cluster catalog to create a local working directory
+
[source,bash]
----
commodore catalog compile "${CLUSTER_ID}"
----

== Deploy cloudscale LBaaS instance and move floating IP

. Disable ArgoCD auto sync
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl --as=cluster-admin -n syn patch apps root --type=json \
  -p '[{"op":"replace", "path":"/spec/syncPolicy", "value": {}}]'
----

. Deploy the cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller and update the Terraform config
+
[source,bash]
----
pushd inventory/classes/${TENANT_ID}

yq eval -i '.applications += ["cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller"]' ${CLUSTER_ID}.yml
yq eval -i ".parameters.openshift4_terraform.terraform_variables.allocate_router_vip_for_lb_controller = true" \
  ${CLUSTER_ID}.yml

git commit -a -m "Prepare ingress migration to cloudscale LBaaS for ${CLUSTER_ID}"
git push

popd
----

. Compile catalog again
+
[source,bash]
----
commodore catalog compile ${CLUSTER_ID}
----

. Deploy cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl --as=cluster-admin apply -f catalog/manifests/cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller/00_namespace.yaml
kapitan refs --reveal --refs-path catalog/refs -f catalog/manifests/cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller/10_secrets.yaml | \
  kubectl --as=cluster-admin apply -f -
kubectl --as=cluster-admin apply -Rf catalog/manifests/cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller/10_kustomize
kubectl -n appuio-cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller \
  wait --for condition=available \
  deploy cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller-controller-manager
----

. Deploy ingress loadbalancer
+
[source,bash]
----
yq 'del(.spec.floatingIPAddresses)' catalog/manifests/cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller/20_loadbalancers.yaml | \
  kubectl --as=cluster-admin apply -f -
----

. Wait for the cluster ingress to become reachable via the loadbalancer
+
[source,bash]
----
export LB_IP=""
while [ "$LB_IP" == "" ]; do
  export LB_IP=$(kubectl --as=cluster-admin -n appuio-cloudscale-loadbalancer-controller \
    get loadbalancer ingress -oyaml | \
    yq '(.status.virtualIPAddresses[]|select(.address|contains("2a06")|not)|.address)//""')
  if [ "$LB_IP" == "" ]; then
    echo -n "."
    sleep 5
  fi
done && echo -e "\nLoadbalancer available at ${LB_IP}"

export APPS_DOMAIN=$(kapitan inventory -t cluster --inventory-backend=reclass-rs | \
  yq .parameters.openshift.appsDomain)
curl --resolve console-openshift-console.${APPS_DOMAIN}:80:${LB_IP} \
  http://console-openshift-console.${APPS_DOMAIN} -vI <1>
----
<1> This command should return `HTTP/1.1 302 Found`

== Update Terraform state

. Configure Terraform environment
+
[source,bash]
----
cat <<EOF > ./terraform.env
CLOUDSCALE_API_TOKEN
TF_VAR_ignition_bootstrap
TF_VAR_lb_cloudscale_api_secret
TF_VAR_control_vshn_net_token
GIT_AUTHOR_NAME
GIT_AUTHOR_EMAIL
HIERADATA_REPO_TOKEN
EOF
----

. Setup Terraform
+
[source,bash]
----
# Set terraform image and tag to be used
tf_image=$(\
  yq eval ".parameters.openshift4_terraform.images.terraform.image" \
  dependencies/openshift4-terraform/class/defaults.yml)
tf_tag=$(\
  yq eval ".parameters.openshift4_terraform.images.terraform.tag" \
  dependencies/openshift4-terraform/class/defaults.yml)

# Generate the terraform alias
base_dir=$(pwd)
alias terraform='touch .terraformrc; docker run -it --rm \
  -e REAL_UID=$(id -u) \
  -e TF_CLI_CONFIG_FILE=/tf/.terraformrc \
  --env-file ${base_dir}/terraform.env \
  -w /tf \
  -v $(pwd):/tf \
  --ulimit memlock=-1 \
  "${tf_image}:${tf_tag}" /tf/terraform.sh'

export GITLAB_REPOSITORY_URL=$(curl -sH "Authorization: Bearer $(commodore fetch-token)" ${COMMODORE_API_URL}/clusters/${CLUSTER_ID} | jq -r '.gitRepo.url' | sed 's|ssh://||; s|/|:|')
export GITLAB_REPOSITORY_NAME=${GITLAB_REPOSITORY_URL##*/}
export GITLAB_CATALOG_PROJECT_ID=$(curl -sH "Authorization: Bearer ${GITLAB_TOKEN}" "https://git.vshn.net/api/v4/projects?simple=true&search=${GITLAB_REPOSITORY_NAME/.git}" | jq -r ".[] | select(.ssh_url_to_repo == \"${GITLAB_REPOSITORY_URL}\") | .id")
export GITLAB_STATE_URL="https://git.vshn.net/api/v4/projects/${GITLAB_CATALOG_PROJECT_ID}/terraform/state/cluster"

pushd catalog/manifests/openshift4-terraform/
----

. Initialize Terraform
+
[source,bash]
----
terraform init \
  "-backend-config=address=${GITLAB_STATE_URL}" \
  "-backend-config=lock_address=${GITLAB_STATE_URL}/lock" \
  "-backend-config=unlock_address=${GITLAB_STATE_URL}/lock" \
  "-backend-config=username=${GITLAB_USER}" \
  "-backend-config=password=${GITLAB_TOKEN}" \
  "-backend-config=lock_method=POST" \
  "-backend-config=unlock_method=DELETE" \
  "-backend-config=retry_wait_min=5"
----

. Move floating IP Terraform state
+
[source,bash]
----
terraform state mv "module.cluster.module.lb.cloudscale_floating_ip.router_vip[0]" \
  "module.cluster.cloudscale_floating_ip.router_vip[0]"
----

. Get router floating IP from Terraform state
+
[source,bash]
----
terraform refresh
export INGRESS_FLOATING_IP=$(terraform output -raw router_vip)
----

. Grab LB hostnames from Terraform state
+
[source,bash]
----
declare -a LB_FQDNS
for id in 1 2; do
  LB_FQDNS[$id]=$(terraform state show "module.cluster.module.lb.cloudscale_server.lb[$(expr $id - 1)]" | grep fqdn | awk '{print $2}' | tr -d ' "\r\n')
done
----

. Disable Puppet on LBs
+
[source,bash]
----
for lb in "${LB_FQDNS[@]}"; do
  ssh $lb sudo puppetctl stop "Migrating router floating IP"
done
----

. Remove router floating IP from Floaty and restart keepalived on LBs
+
[source,bash]
----
for lb in "${LB_FQDNS[@]}"; do
  ssh $lb sudo sed -i "/${INGRESS_FLOATING_IP}/d" /etc/floaty/global.yaml
  ssh $lb sudo systemctl restart keepalived
done
----

. Run Terraform
+
[source,bash]
----
terraform apply
----

. Merge Hieradata MR
+
NOTE: This won't have an immediate effect since we've disabled Puppet on the LBs.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
Review this MR very carefully.
The MR *must* remove the router floating IP in `profile_openshift4_gateway::floating_addresses`, if it was previously present.
Additionally the MR will remove the router backends.

Please be aware that in some setups, such as clusters which have the router exposed on internal IPs, the router backends may still be required after migrating the public ingress to a cloudscale LB instance.
====

. Switch back to Commodore working directory
+
[source,bash]
----
popd
----

== Move floating IP to LBaaS instance

. Set router floating IP in cluster config
+
[source,bash]
----
pushd inventory/classes/${TENANT_ID}

yq eval -i '.parameters.openshift.cloudscale.ingress_floating_ip_v4 = "'$INGRESS_FLOATING_IP'"' \
  ${CLUSTER_ID}.yml

git commit -a -m "Migrate ingress floating IP to cloudscale LBaaS for ${CLUSTER_ID}"
git push

popd
----

. Compile and push catalog
+
[source,bash]
----
commodore catalog compile ${CLUSTER_ID} --push -i
----

. Enable ArgoCD sync
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl --as=cluster-admin -n syn patch apps root --type=json \
  -p '[{
    "op":"replace",
    "path":"/spec/syncPolicy",
    "value": {"automated": {"prune": true, "selfHeal": true}}
  }]'
----

. Wait until cloudscale floating IP is attached to cloudscale LBaaS instance
+
[source,bash]
----
export AUTH_HEADER="Authorization: Bearer ${TF_VAR_lb_cloudscale_api_secret}"
while [ "$(curl -sH"$AUTH_HEADER" https://api.cloudscale.ch/v1/floating-ips/${INGRESS_FLOATING_IP} | jq -r '.load_balancer')" == "null" ]; do
  echo -n '.'
  sleep 1
done && echo -e "\nFloating IP attached to LBaaS instance"
----

. Verify that cluster console is accessible
+
[source,bash]
----
curl https://console-openshift-console.${APPS_DOMAIN} -vI
----

. Enable Puppet on LBs
+
[source,bash]
----
for lb in "${LB_FQDNS[@]}"; do
  ssh $lb sudo puppetctl start
done
----

. Verify that cluster console is still accessible
+
[source,bash]
----
curl https://console-openshift-console.${APPS_DOMAIN} -vI
----
