docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/use-cloudscale.adoc, before:

= Use cloudscale.ch

IMPORTANT: Currently the Terraform module which this component uses for cloudscale.ch only supports provisioning VSHN-managed OCP4 clusters.

NOTE: See https://kb.vshn.ch/oc4/how-tos/cloudscale/install.html[the cloudscale.ch installation how-to] for a comprehensive how-to for setting up OCP4 on cloudscale.ch.

The following steps show how to set up Terraform with cloudscale.ch

NOTE: The component currently assumes that the Git repositories live on a GitLab instance.

== Setup credentials

. Set up 3 new API keys in https://control.cloudscale.ch[control.cloudscale.ch].
  Two of them are used for the Terraform pipeline.
.. The first key should be created with read-only permissions and will be used for read-only GitLab CI jobs.
.. The second key can be created with read/write permissions and will be used for mutating GitLab CI jobs but also for the initial cluster installation.
.. The third key needs read/write permissions and will be deployed onto the LBs for https://github.com/vshn/floaty[Floaty]):

include::partial$puppet-lb-cred.adoc[]

== Setup component

. Configure component parameters.
+
[source,yaml]
----
openshift4_terraform:
  provider: cloudscale
  gitlab_ci:
    git: <1>
      username: Max Mustermann
      email: mm@example.com
  terraform_variables:
    # Required parameters
    base_domain: ${openshift:baseDomain}
    ignition_ca: |-
      -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
      ...
    ssh_keys:
      - ssh-ed25519 AA...
    hieradata_repo_user: project_123_bot <2>

    # Optional parameters:
    worker_count: 3
    infra_flavor: plus-24-6
----
<1> The Git author name and email address.
Used when creating hieradata commits.
If not specified, the GitLab CI defaults will be used.
<2> The user created for the hieradata project access token.
Please note that the Terraform module currently only supports the https://git.vshn.net/appuio/appuio_hieradata[VSHN APPUiO hieradata]

. Compile the cluster catalog
. Configure GitLab repository
  - "Settings > CI/CD > General pipelines > Configuration file" +
    `manifests/openshift4-terraform/gitlab-ci.yml`
  - "Settings > CI/CD > Variables"
    * `CLOUDSCALE_TOKEN_RO`
    * `CLOUDSCALE_TOKEN_RW`
    * `CLOUDSCALE_FLOATY_SECRET`
    * `HIERADATA_REPO_TOKEN` -- the VSHN APPUiO hieradata project access token
    * `CONTROL_VSHN_NET_TOKEN`

Commit message:

Drop the read-only cloudscale token, add token naming convention

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/use-cloudscale.adoc, after:

= Use cloudscale.ch

IMPORTANT: Currently the Terraform module which this component uses for cloudscale.ch only supports provisioning VSHN-managed OCP4 clusters.

NOTE: See https://kb.vshn.ch/oc4/how-tos/cloudscale/install.html[the cloudscale.ch installation how-to] for a comprehensive how-to for setting up OCP4 on cloudscale.ch.

The following steps show how to set up Terraform with cloudscale.ch

NOTE: The component currently assumes that the Git repositories live on a GitLab instance.

== Setup credentials

NOTE: Don't create new tokens for clusters already set up with the standard install instructions. Use the existing ones stored in vault under `/cloudscale` and `/floaty`.

. Set up 2 new API tokens with read+write permissions in https://control.cloudscale.ch[control.cloudscale.ch].
.. The first token should be named `${CLUSTER_ID}` and will be used for the initial cluster setup, the cluster's CSI driver and GitLab CI jobs.
.. The second token should be named `${CLUSTER_ID}_floaty` and will be deployed onto the LBs for https://github.com/vshn/floaty[Floaty]).

include::partial$puppet-lb-cred.adoc[]

== Setup component

. Configure component parameters.
+
[source,yaml]
----
openshift4_terraform:
  provider: cloudscale
  gitlab_ci:
    git: <1>
      username: Max Mustermann
      email: mm@example.com
  terraform_variables:
    # Required parameters
    base_domain: ${openshift:baseDomain}
    ignition_ca: |-
      -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
      ...
    ssh_keys:
      - ssh-ed25519 AA...
    hieradata_repo_user: project_123_bot <2>

    # Optional parameters:
    worker_count: 3
    infra_flavor: plus-24-6
----
<1> The Git author name and email address.
Used when creating hieradata commits.
If not specified, the GitLab CI defaults will be used.
<2> The user created for the hieradata project access token.
Please note that the Terraform module currently only supports the https://git.vshn.net/appuio/appuio_hieradata[VSHN APPUiO hieradata]

. Compile the cluster catalog
. Configure GitLab repository
  - "Settings > CI/CD > General pipelines > Configuration file" +
    `manifests/openshift4-terraform/gitlab-ci.yml`
  - "Settings > CI/CD > Variables"
    * `CLOUDSCALE_TOKEN_RW`
    * `CLOUDSCALE_FLOATY_SECRET`
    * `HIERADATA_REPO_TOKEN` -- the VSHN APPUiO hieradata project access token
    * `CONTROL_VSHN_NET_TOKEN`
